# Window sizes and scrolling
Since `<html>` is the root tag, we can use `document.documentElement` to do anything related to window 

## Width and Height of the window

width = `document.documentElement.clientWidth`
height = `document.documentElement.clientHeight`

**NOTE** watch out for `zoom`ed web pages. It will return less pixels than normal one

```js
    console.log('Width of Window: ', document.documentElement.clientWidth)
    console.log('Height of Window: ', document.documentElement.clientHeight)
```

### Not window.innerWidth/Height
When though these two properties are available on `window` object, we shouldn't use it because of scroll bar. It includes scroll bar space

### DOCTYPE is mandatory
<!doctype html> is required to proper functioning of geometry properties

## Width and Height of the document
Theoretically, `document.documentElement.scrollHeight` should return height of the total document. But there are some browser inconsistencies, so we should use this

```js
let scrollHeight = Math.max(
  document.body.scrollHeight, document.documentElement.scrollHeight,
  document.body.offsetHeight, document.documentElement.offsetHeight,
  document.body.clientHeight, document.documentElement.clientHeight
);

console.log('Full document height, with scrolled out part: ' + scrollHeight);
```

## Get the current scroll position
Again, theoretically `document.documentElement.scrollTop` should give current scroll state (top position), but there are some inconsistencies. So we should use, `pageXOffset` and `pageYOffset`

```js
console.log('Current scroll from the top: ' + window.pageYOffset);
console.log('Current scroll from the left: ' + window.pageXOffset);
```

**NOTE** These properties are read only. So, how could we scroll to required position? If these are read only and there are browser inconsistencies with documentElement.scrollTop?


## Scrolling: scrollTo, scrollBy, scrollIntoView
`window.scrollBy(x, y)` => scrolls to given relative position. i.e. a value of `10, 20` will scroll the page 10px right and 20px down

`window.scrollTo(x, y)` => scroll to given absolute position.

`elem.scrollIntoView(top)` if `top` is `true` then `elem` appear of the top of window. if `false` then `elem` will appear at the bottom of the window.

## Forbid the scrolling

Setting `document.body.style.overflow = 'hidden'` will make the scroll bar disappear and results in forbidden scrolling

`document.body.style.overflow = ''` make things normal