# Coordinates

There are two type of coordinates. 
1. Coordinates relative to window, same as `position: fixed`, are called `clientX` and `clientY`

2. Coordinates related to document, same as `position: absolute`, are called `pageX` and `pageY`


At the beginning of page load both share same values. But after scrolling, `clientX` refers to the distance from top of window whereas `pageX` refer to the distance from top of the document (which may be scrolled out and invisible)

## Element coordinates: getBoundingClientRect

Every element is a box, so we get coordinates, we can use
`elem.getBoundingClientRect()` method which returns `DOMRect` object and has following properties

* `x` => x coordinate, relative to window
* `y` => y coordinate, relative to window
* `width` => width of the element / rectangle
* `height` => height of the element / rectangle

From this, we can easily calculate following properties (which also present in the object)
* `top` => y coordinate, relative to window
* `left` => x coordinate, relative to window
* `bottom` => y coordinate + height
* `right` => x coordinate + width

### Why derived properties are needed? Why does top/left exist if there’s x/y?
Because while selecting using mouse (click and drag), we can click at the right bottom and then drag upwards. For such actions, `right/bottom` and `width/height` are needed and `top/left` can be calculated

### Internet Explorer and Edge: no support for x/y
So, we have to work with `top/left`

### Coordinates right/bottom are different from CSS position properties
Because, in CSS right means distance from right edge and bottom means distance from bottom edge. Those are not coordinates

## elementFromPoint(x, y)
document.elementFromPoint(x, y) returns the most nested element at window coordinates (x, y)

This code highlights, middle element in the window
```js
let centerX = document.documentElement.clientWidth / 2;
let centerY = document.documentElement.clientHeight / 2;

let elem = document.elementFromPoint(centerX, centerY);

elem.style.background = "red";
console.log(elem.tagName);
```

**NOTE** `elementFromPoint(x, y)` can be called on any element. If the element is scrolled out, this method returns `null`

## Using for `fixed` positioning
Most of the time we need to place some element near another element. For example, error messages above a form when it happens.

To do that, we need coordinates of `form` and then calculate `error messages` coordinates, like so

```js
let elem = document.getElementById("coords-show-mark");

function createMessageUnder(elem, html) {
  // create message element
  let message = document.createElement('div');
  // better to use a css class for the style here
  message.style.cssText = "position:fixed; color: red";

  // assign coordinates, don't forget "px"!
  let coords = elem.getBoundingClientRect();

  message.style.left = coords.left + "px";
  message.style.top = coords.bottom + "px";

  message.innerHTML = html;

  return message;
}

// Usage:
// add it for 5 seconds in the document
let message = createMessageUnder(elem, 'Hello, world!');
document.body.append(message);
setTimeout(() => message.remove(), 5000);
```

But this is fixed positioning, meaning that coordinate of an element in visible window. 

## Document coordinate
To get an elements absolute coordinate, we need to calculate it from an elements fixed position coordinate and how page a page is scrolled.

```js
// get document coordinates of the element
function getCoords(elem) {
  let box = elem.getBoundingClientRect();

  return {
    top: box.top + window.pageYOffset,
    left: box.left + window.pageXOffset
  };
}
```