# Walking the DOM
DOM allows us to do anything with document elements.
To do that, we first need to reach specific element, store it in a variable and do the manipulation.

A document is available in `document` object and it is entry point for document.
`<html>` element is available in `document.documentElement` object
`<head>` element is available in `document.head`
`<body>` element is available in `document.body`

We can walk the DOM using following objects

Get parent node of current element using `parentNode`

Get child nodes of current node using `childNodes`

Previous sibiling node of current node using `previousSibiling`

Next sibiling node of current node using `nextSibiling`

Get first child node of current node using `firstChild`

Get last child node of current node using `lastChild`

In DOM, if we say `children` or `childNodes` it means immediate child. For grand children and everything we say `descendants`

```js
elem.childNodes[0] === elem.firstChild
elem.childNodes[elem.childNodes.length - 1] === elem.lastChild
```

`childNodes` looks like an array, but it is not an array, but a collection - a special array like iterable object.

```js
for (let node of document.body.childNodes) {
  alert(node); // shows all nodes from the collection
}

// undefined (there's no filter method!)
alert(document.body.childNodes.filter); 
// childNodes is not array, but iterable

alert( Array.from(document.body.childNodes).filter ); // now it's there
```

## Few point to remember: 
* DOM collections and all navigation properties listed in this chapter are read-only.
* DOM collections are live.i.e. If we copy (object, so it is reference) `elem.childNodes` in a variable and change DOM, changes will reflect in the variable as well
* Should use `for..of`, not `for..in` because we don't want all enumerable properties such as length, item, values, etc


## Siblings and parent
```html
<html><head></head><body><script>
  // HTML is "dense" to evade extra "blank" text nodes.

  // parent of <body> is <html>
  alert( document.body.parentNode === document.documentElement ); // true

  // after <head> goes <body>
  alert( document.head.nextSibling ); 
  // HTMLBodyElement

  // before <body> goes <head>
  alert( document.body.previousSibling ); 
  // HTMLHeadElement
</script></body></html>
```

### Elements only navigation
So far we see nodes. i.e. it includes nodes such as text and comments. But mostly we only want to work with html elements. For that we need to use `Element` counterpart of so far seen properties

`childNodes` => `children`
`parentNode` => `parentElement`
`previousSibling` => `previousElementSibling`
`nextSibling` => `nextElementSibling`
`firstChild` => `firstElementChild`
`lastChild` => `lastElementChild`

Compare this with previous example
```js
<html>
<body>
  <div>Begin</div>

  <ul>
    <li>Information</li>
  </ul>

  <div>End</div>

  <script>
    for (let elem of document.body.children) {
      alert(elem); // DIV, UL, DIV, SCRIPT
    }
  </script>
  ...
</body>
</html>
```

## Tables
There are some additional properties for specific elements such as `table` for convenience.

* `table.rows` – the collection of <tr> elements of the table.
* `table.caption/tHead/tFoot` – references to elements <caption>, <thead>, <tfoot>.
* `table.tBodies` – the collection of <tbody> elements (can be many according to the standard.
* `tbody.rows` – the collection of <tr> inside.
* `tr.cells` – the collection of <td> and <th> cells inside the given <tr>
* `tr.sectionRowIndex` – the number of the given <tr> inside the enclosing <thead>/<tbody>
* `tr.rowIndex` – the number of the <tr> in the table.
* `td.cellIndex` – the number of the cell inside the enclosing <tr>

```html
<table id="table">
  <tr>
    <td>one</td><td>two</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>three</td><td>four</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<script>
  // get the content of the first row, second cell
  alert( table.rows[0].cells[1].innerHTML ) // "two"
</script>
```
### why `parentElement`?
Since parent can be only element (text and comment nodes can't be parent), why can't we use just parentNode?

Most of the cases both are some except
```js
console.log( document.documentElement.parentNode ); // document
console.log( document.documentElement.parentElement ); // null
```

Or when we want to travel from an element to `<html>` tag, not `document` element
```js
while(elem = elem.parentElement) { // go up till <html>
  alert( elem );
}
```

## Exercises

### DOM Children

```html
<html>
<body>
  <div>Users:</div>
  <ul>
    <li>John</li>
    <li>Pete</li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
```

How to access 
* The <div> DOM node?
* The <ul> DOM node?
* The second <li> (with Pete)?

```js
// Solution to access div
document.body.firstElementChild
// or
document.children[0]


// Solution to access ul
document.body.lastElementChild
// or
document.children[1]

// Solution to access li (with peter)
document.body.lastElementChild.lastElementChild
```

### The sibling question
If elem – is an arbitrary DOM element node…

* Is it true that elem.lastChild.nextSibling is always null?
* Is it true that elem.children[0].previousSibling is always null ?

*SOLUTION*
First there as to be children for `elem` otherwise there will be errors
1. Yes. Because after navigating to `lastChild` there won't be any `nextSibling`

2. No. There can be `previousSibling` to `children` because we are looking `previousSibling` of an Element node, so there can be any text / comment node as sibling

### Select all diagonal cells
```js
let table = document.body.firstElementChild
for (let i = 0; table.rows.length; i++) {
  table.rows[i].cells[i].style.backgroundColor  = 'red'
}
