# Debugging in Chrome

## The `Sources` panel
This panel has three parts
* File Navigator - show files of this web page
* Code Editor - shows code of selected fle
* Debugging Options - shows tools to debug

### Console
There is a separate console panel, but we press `esc` it opens below source panel

### Breakpoints
A breakpoint is a point of code where debugger will automatically pause code execution. You can set break points by clicking on the code line number.

By setting break points, you can see what the variable values are at that point, and call stacks, etc

There is also `conditional breakpoints` where make a break point based on conditions like if variable equals to a value, etc

### Debugger command
We can also add breakpoints within our code editor. Just add `debugger` command to javascript file.
```js
function hello(name) {
  let phrase = `Hello, ${name}!`;
  debugger;  // <-- the debugger stops here
  say(phrase);
}
```

### Pause and look around
After setting breakpoints, we have to reload the page to start debugging by pressing `F5`

#### Dropdowns
1. Watch - Examine any variable or expression at any moment
2. Call Stack - shows nested call chain. Clickable!
3. Scope - shows currently available variables both local and global. We can examine other scope variables too by clicking on call stack


### Tracing the execution
There are several button to control execution and debugging

- `Resume` To jump to next breakpoint or continue the script execution `F8`

- `Step` executes the next command `F9`

- `Step over` executes the next command, but won't go into the function code. i.e. not executing code inside a function step by step `F10`

- `Step In` executes the next command, and go into the function code if it happens to be a function `F11`

- `Step Out` if we are done with debugging a function code, then we can step out of it. i.e. skip remaining code and go to the end. `Shift + F11`

- `Enable/Disable` breakpoints

- `Enable/Disable automatic pause` in case of an error. When enabled, and the developer tools is open, a script error automatically pauses the execution. Then we can analyze variables to see what went wrong. So if our script dies with an error, we can open debugger, enable this option and reload the page to see where it dies and what’s the context at that moment.

- `Continue to here` we can jump several lines of code when `step` in to code without setting break points using this option from context menu

### Logging
we can use `console.log()` statements to log some output to console 

**Read More**: https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools