# Cookies, document.cookie

Web pages are stateless. That means that there is no link between one page and another page from same domain. Both pages doesn't know each other.

So there has to a mechanism that the same user/browser requests another page. For example, if there is no such thing, web server can't distinguish between every request and there can't be a continuous user experience. A user can't add a product to cart and then go to next page to add another product. There is no common `cart` between page.

`Cookies` are strings of data that are stored directly in the browser. This helps to server to identify who is sending request.

**THE PROCESS**

1. Server sends `Set-Cookie` header to set cookie with a unique `session identifier`
2. Session identifier cookie is stored in browser.
3. Next time the browser makes request to the same domain, it sends cookie to the server using `Cookie` header
4. Now the server know which browser/user made that request and act accordingly

## Reading from document.cookie

We can see the cookies set by the site, by inspecting `document.cookie`

```js
// At javascript.info, we use Google Analytics for statistics,
// so there should be some cookies
alert(document.cookie) // cookie1=value1; cookie2=value2;...
```

Cookies are stored as `name-value` pairs and delimited by `;`

## Writing to document.cookie

When we write a cookie (name-value pair) in only updates mentioned cookie name, not overwrite all the string

```js
document.cookie = 'user=John' // update only cookie named 'user'
alert(document.cookie) // show all cookies
```

The `name-value` pair can contain any characters, so it needs to be encoded with `encodeURIComponent`

```js
// special characters (spaces), need encoding
let name = 'my name'
let value = 'John Smith'

// encodes the cookie as my%20name=John%20Smith
document.cookie = encodeURIComponent(name) + '=' + encodeURIComponent(value)

alert(document.cookie) // ...; my%20name=John%20Smith
```

**NOTE** Only 4kb of storage is allowed for cookies

## Options

Cookies has several options that tell more about them other than name-value pair

### Path

Determines which path the cookie belongs to and the browser sends cookie back to server only when requesting mentioned path.

For example `path=/admin` is visible for request `/admin`, `/admin/users`, etc, but not for `/home` and `/about`

To set a cookie for whole domain we should use root path `path=/`

### domain

As we already know, a `site.com` and `dev.site.com` are different domains when though the later is subdomain of the same. So to determine to which domain the cookie belongs to, we need to tell that information to in a cookie

```js
// at site.com
document.cookie = 'user=John'

// at forum.site.com
alert(document.cookie) // no user
```

Please note that if you DO NOT mention domain, it can't assume `site.com` and `dev.site.com` are same. But it can, if you say so

```js
// at site.com
// make the cookie accessible on any subdomain *.site.com:
document.cookie = 'user=John; domain=site.com'
// which happen to be like this in the past
// document.cookie = "user=John; domain=.site.com"

// later

// at forum.site.com
alert(document.cookie) // has cookie user=John
```

### expires, max-age

You browser may delete cookies upon closing the browser or it may preserve it. It depends on the default settings or settings you used.

Since cookies are mainly session identifiers, we need a way make a session `expire`.

`expires` must have a date in GMT timezone. We can use `date.toUTCString` to get it

```js
// +1 day from now
let date = new Date(Date.now() + 86400e3)
date = date.toUTCString()
document.cookie = 'user=John; expires=' + date
```

`max-age` is alternative to `expire` while expire is absolute, max-age is relative. You can make a cookie delete itself after certain period (instead of certain data)

```js
// cookie will die +1 hour from now
document.cookie = 'user=John; max-age=3600'

// delete cookie (let it expire right now)
document.cookie = 'user=John; max-age=0'
```

### secure

If you want your cookies only transferred over a `https` protocol, then you must use `secure`

```js
// assuming we're on https:// now
// set the cookie secure (only accessible if over HTTPS)
document.cookie = 'user=John; secure'
```

### samesite

Another security attribute is `samesite` which helps to protect from XSRF attacks

### XSRF attack

What is `XSRF` attack? Its full form is `Cross Site Request Forgery`. Let us understand what it is...

I visit to `mybank.com` and it stores a cookie in my browser. And everytime I/my browser sends request to the `mybank.com` it also send the authentication/identification cookie. All is well, if I only browser `mybank.com`

If I visit `evil.com` and it happens to send requests to `mybank.com` along with other bank sites, my browser also sends my identification cookie to `mybank.com` which will result in all kinds digital thefts. It is called `XSRF`

Consider, `evil.com` has a form that submits details to `mybank.com` which will result in sending auth cookies to `mybank.com`

### Enter cookie samesite option

When `mybank.com` uses `samesite=strict (same as samesite without value)` in cookies, then my browser won't send cookie to `mybank.com` when the request is send from `evil.com`

Even if you visit another page in `mybank.com` it won't recognise you. You may happen to experience this when you click on `prev` button in the web browser.

cookie only works for one page. For general recognition we can use `samesite=lax`

Now browser sends cookie, if it is `GET` method or performs top level navigation (changes url in the browser address bar) `<iframe>` navigation are not considered top level

Please note that along with this, every form should also send XSRF tokens, so that the server recongnises the request.

## httpOnly

When a cookie has `httpOnly` option, then javascript can't access or manipulate it using `document.cookie`

## Appendix: Cookie functions

There are libraries to work with cookies. Here is vannila js snippets

### getCookie(name)

```js
// returns the cookie with the given name,
// or undefined if not found
function getCookie(name) {
  let matches = document.cookie.match(
    new RegExp(
      '(?:^|; )' +
        name.replace(/([\.$?*|{}\(\)\[\]\\\/\+^])/g, '\\$1') +
        '=([^;]*)'
    )
  )
  return matches ? decodeURIComponent(matches[1]) : undefined
}
```

### setCookie(name, value, options)

```js
function setCookie(name, value, options = {}) {
  options = {
    path: '/',
    // add other defaults here if necessary
    ...options,
  }

  if (options.expires instanceof Date) {
    options.expires = options.expires.toUTCString()
  }

  let updatedCookie = encodeURIComponent(name) + '=' + encodeURIComponent(value)

  for (let optionKey in options) {
    updatedCookie += '; ' + optionKey
    let optionValue = options[optionKey]
    if (optionValue !== true) {
      updatedCookie += '=' + optionValue
    }
  }

  document.cookie = updatedCookie
}

// Example of use:
setCookie('user', 'John', { secure: true, 'max-age': 3600 })
```

### deleteCookie(name)

```js
function deleteCookie(name) {
  setCookie(name, '', {
    'max-age': -1,
  })
}
```

**NOTE** Updating or deleting must use same path and domain

## Appendix: Third-party cookies

A cookie is called `third-party` if it’s placed by domain other than the page user is visiting.

If you happen to visit a ecommerce site by clicking on a google advertisement. Google stores a cookie in your browser. There after, wherever you go, google will follow you. Because, the sites you visit after that may also use Google Adsense, so the google script in that sites, identifies you and knew that you are interested in particular product (since you visited it in the first place) and keep showing you that product.

In other words,

1. You are visiting `myEStore.com` and via google adwords
2. Google places a cookie, from `myEStore.com`
3. You visit other sites which happen to use Google Adsense
4. Those sites (via its google adsense script) can identify you because of google already stored a cookie in your browser
5. Now google keep showing the product you are interested in or its alternatives

**NOTE** If you happen to use Google Analytics, it sets cookies using `document.cookie` which belongs to your domain, not google's domain. So it is not third party cookie

## Appendix: GDPR
