# LocalStorage, sessionStorage

Web storage object `localStorage` and `sessionStorage` allow to save key/value pairs in the browser.

Data stored in `sessionStorage` object persist with a session. i.e. a page refresh will not result in lose of data, but closing the browser will

Data stored in `localStorage` object persist until it is cleared. i.e. a page refresh, a browser restart or even os restart

Both storage objects provide same methods and properties:

- `setItem(key, value)` – store key/value pair.
- `getItem(key)` – get the value by key.
- `removeItem(key)` – remove the key with its value.
- `clear()` – delete everything.
- `key(index)` – get the key on a given position.
- `length` – the number of stored items.

## localStorage demo

The main features of localStorage are:

- Shared between all tabs and windows from the same origin.
- The data does not expire. It remains after the browser restart and even OS reboot.

```js
localStorage.setItem('test', 1)
console.log(localStorage.getItem('test')) // 1
```

## Object like access

It can be accessed just like any other objects, but not recommended. Highly recommended to use given method such as set/getItem

```js
// set key
localStorage.test = 2

// get key
console.log(localStorage.test) // 2

// remove key
delete localStorage.test

// Issue
let key = 'length'
localStorage[key] = 5 // Error, can't assign length
```

## Looping over keys

```js
for (let i = 0; i < localStorage.length; i++) {
  let key = localStorage.key(i)
  console.log(`${key}: ${localStorage.getItem(key)}`)
}

// bad try
for (let key in localStorage) {
  console.log(key) // shows getItem, setItem and other built-in stuff
}

for (let key in localStorage) {
  if (!localStorage.hasOwnProperty(key)) {
    continue // skip keys like "setItem", "getItem" etc
  }
  console.log(`${key}: ${localStorage.getItem(key)}`)
}

// Best way
let keys = Object.keys(localStorage)
for (let key of keys) {
  console.log(`${key}: ${localStorage.getItem(key)}`)
}
```

## Strings only

Please note that both key and value must be strings.

If were any other type, like a number, or an object, it gets converted to string automatically:

```js
sessionStorage.user = { name: 'John' }
console.log(sessionStorage.user) // [object Object]

// use JSON to store objects
sessionStorage.user = JSON.stringify({ name: 'John' })

// sometime later
let user = JSON.parse(sessionStorage.user)
console.log(user.name) // John

// added formatting options to JSON.stringify to make the object look nicer
console.log(JSON.stringify(localStorage, null, 2))
```

## sessionStorage

- The sessionStorage exists only within the current browser tab.
- Another tab with the same page will have a different storage.
- But it is shared between iframes in the same tab (assuming they come from the same origin).
- The data survives page refresh, but not closing/opening the tab.

```js
sessionStorage.setItem('test', 1)
console.log(sessionStorage.getItem('test')) // after refresh: 1
```

## Storage event

When the data gets updated in localStorage or sessionStorage, `storage` event triggers, with properties:

- `key` – the key that was changed (null if .clear() is called).
- `oldValue` – the old value (null if the key is newly added).
- `newValue` – the new value (null if the key is removed).
- `url` – the url of the document where the update happened.
- `storageArea` – either localStorage or sessionStorage object where the update happened.

**NOTE** the event triggers on all `window` objects where the storage is accessible, _except the one_ that caused it.
