# Keyboard: keydown and keyup
Keyboard events are used to handle keyboard actions, not to handle input.

Because a input can be given by various ways (copy/paste, speech recognition, etc) we shouldn't use keyboard event for that.

## Keydown and keyup
`keydown` event happens when a key is pressed down and `keyup` event happens when it is released

To get the character of pressed key, we need to use `event.key`

To get the physical key code of the pressed key, we need to use `event.code`

Letter keys have codes "Key<letter>": "KeyA", "KeyB" etc.
Digit keys have codes: "Digit<number>": "Digit0", "Digit1" etc.
Special keys are coded by their names: "Enter", "Backspace", "Tab" etc.

When pressing `z` and `Shift+z` 
`event.key` will be `z` and `Z` where as
`event.code` will be `KeyZ`


`event.key` give character, not just English, but the language the user is using

`event.code` gives physical key irrelevant of language user is using. ex. `ShiftLeft` and `ShiftRight`

## Auto Repeats
When a key is pressed long enough, `keydown` event is triggered again and again. If the event is repeated triggered, then `event.repeat` property will be set to `true` otherwise `false`

## Default actions
There are many default actions for keydown events such as a character input, deleting a character (Delete, Backspace keys), saving (ctrl+s), etc

## Legacy
There is a `keypress` event and `keyCode`, `charCode`, `which` properties. These are all deprecated now and can only be found in old code.

## Exercises

### Extended hot keys
```js
runOnKeys(
  () => alert("Hello!"),
  "KeyQ",
  "KeyW"
);

function runOnKeys(fn, key1, key2) {
  const keys = new Set()
  document.addEventListener('keydown', e => {
    keys.add(e.code)
    if (keys.has(key1) && keys.has(key2)) {
      fn()
    }
  })

  document.addEventListener('keyup', e => {
    keys.delete(e.code)
  })      
}

```